README.md, before:

# Hessian of Perplexity for Large Language Models by PyTorch autograd

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/stars/vectozavr/llm-hessian?style=social"/>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/forks/vectozavr/llm-hessian?style=social"/>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/vectozavr/llm-hessian?style=flat&v=2"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <b>Open-source tool to compute the Hessian of the Perplexity function for Large Language Models (LLMs) using PyTorch autograd</b><br>
  <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.04520"><b>Technical Report on arXiv</b></a>
</p>

---

## 📖 Overview
This repository provides an accurate and efficient implementation for computing the **Hessian of the Perplexity** function in LLMs such as OPT-125M using PyTorch's native autograd engine. Results include full Hessian matrices and their diagonals across different layers and configurations.

## 📚 Citation
If you find our work helpful, please cite us:
```bibtex
@misc{ilin2025hessian,
      title={Hessian of Perplexity for Large Language Models by PyTorch autograd (Open Source)},
      author={Ivan Ilin},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2504.04520},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.LG},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.04520},
}
```

---

## 📊 Results
### 📌 Full Hessian (Heatmaps for different subsets of parameters)
<p>
  <img src="pdf/hessian_q_proj_t_768.png" width="49%" alt="Hessian of q_proj">
  <img src="pdf/hessian_all_layers_first_block_t_300.png" width="49%" alt="Hessian of all layers">
</p>

<p>
  <i>Left: </i>Hessian for $Q_{proj} \in \mathbb{R}^{768 \times 768}$ from block 0 — first 768 params.<br>
  <i>Right: </i>Hessian for all 6 linear layers in block 0 — 300 params each.
</p>

<p>
  <img src="pdf/hessian_q_proj_all_blocks_t_150.png" width="49%" alt="Hessian of q_proj all blocks">
  <img src="pdf/hessian_all_layers_all_blocks_t_25.png" width="49%" alt="Hessian of all layers all blocks">
</p>

<p>
  <i>Left: </i>Hessian for q_proj across 12 blocks — 150 params each.<br>
  <i>Right: </i>Hessian for all layers in 12 blocks — 25 params each × 6 layers/block.
</p>

### 🔽 Download PyTorch Tensors
Saved as PyTorch tensors:
* [hessian_q_proj_t_768.pt](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/blob/main/data/hessian_q_proj_t_768.pt)
* [hessian_q_proj_all_blocks_t_150.pt](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/blob/main/data/hessian_q_proj_all_blocks_t_150.pt)
* [hessian_all_layers_first_block_t_300.pt](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/blob/main/data/hessian_all_layers_first_block_t_300.pt)
* [hessian_all_layers_all_blocks_t_25.pt](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/blob/main/data/hessian_all_layers_all_blocks_t_25.pt)
* [hessian_diag_q_proj_vhp_samples_5000.pt](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/blob/main/data/diag_hessian/hessian_diag_q_proj_vhp_samples_5000.pt)



### 🔶 Influence of Batch Size
<img src="pdf/losses_vs_bs.png" width="100%" alt="Hessian vs batch size">

Experiments with varying batch size $b \in \\{1, ..., 140\\}$.

### ⭐ Diagonals of the Hessian (entire linear layer)
<img src="pdf/losses_vs_k.png" width="100%" alt="VHP samples">

Varying number of VHP samples $k \in \\{1, ..., 3000\\}$ for diagonal estimation.

---

## ⚙️ Setup
- Python version: [3.12.4](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3124/) 🐍
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

📦 [Click here for full Python 3.12.4 installation guide](PYTHON_INSTALL.md)

---

## 🚀 Parameters
| Argument            | Description |
|---------------------|-------------|
| `--model`           | Hugging Face model identifier. |
| `--layer_name`      | Name of the linear layer to evaluate. |
| `--t`               | Number of parameters to consider per layer. |
| `--block_index`     | Index of a single block (used in some scripts). |
| `--num_blocks`      | Number of blocks to include. |
| `--num_layers`      | Number of linear layers per block. |
| `--b`               | Total number of samples for perplexity. |
| `--vhp_samples`     | VHP samples for Hessian diagonal estimation. |
| `--model_input_bs`  | Number of samples per batch. |
| `--cache_dir`       | Where to load/store weights. Default: `llm_weights`. |
| `--seed`            | Random seed. |

> 💡 **Tips:**
> - Use larger `--model_input_bs` on GPUs with more memory to speed up runtime.
> - Higher `--b` and `--vhp_samples` give more accurate results, but increase compute time.

---

## 🔬 Running your experiments

> [!NOTE]  
> Please note that after running any scripts, a `.pt` Hessian tensor and a `.pdf` heatmap of the Hessian will be saved in the `/data` folder.

### 🔹 Single Layer from One Block
```bash
python single_layer_single_block.py \
    --model facebook/opt-125m \
    --layer_name self_attn.q_proj \
    --block_index 0 \
    --t 5 \
    --b 30 \
    --model_input_bs 2 \
    --seed 0 \
    --cache_dir llm_weights
```

### 🔹 Single Layer from Several Blocks
```bash
python single_layer_several_blocks.py \
    --model facebook/opt-125m \
    --layer_name self_attn.q_proj \
    --t 5 \
    --num_blocks 3 \
    --b 30 \
    --model_input_bs 2 \
    --seed 0 \
    --cache_dir llm_weights
```

### 🔹 Several Layers from Several Blocks
```bash
python several_layers_several_blocks.py \
    --model facebook/opt-125m \
    --t 5 \
    --num_layers 3 \
    --num_blocks 3 \
    --b 30 \
    --model_input_bs 2 \
    --seed 0 \
    --cache_dir llm_weights
```

### 🔹 Compute only Diagonal Elements (full layer)
```bash
python hessian_diag_single_layer.py \
    --model facebook/opt-125m \
    --layer_name self_attn.q_proj \
    --vhp_samples 10 \
    --block_index 0 \
    --b 30 \
    --model_input_bs 2 \
    --seed 0 \
    --cache_dir llm_weights
```

---

## 📄 License
MIT License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

## 💬 Join the Discussion
We welcome issues, feature requests, and contributions! Feel free to open an [issue](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/issues) or a [pull request](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/pulls).

Commit message:

Added support for llama models, added seqlen parameter, added disabling of non-diff modules that prevented hessian to be computed, updated README.md

README.md, after:

# Hessian of Perplexity for Large Language Models by PyTorch autograd

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/stars/vectozavr/llm-hessian?style=social"/>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/forks/vectozavr/llm-hessian?style=social"/>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/github/license/vectozavr/llm-hessian?style=flat&v=2"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <b>Open-source tool to compute the Hessian of the Perplexity function for Large Language Models (LLMs) using PyTorch autograd</b><br>
  <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.04520"><b>Technical Report on arXiv</b></a>
</p>

---

## 📖 Overview
This repository provides an accurate and efficient implementation for computing the **Hessian of the Perplexity** function in LLMs such as OPT-125M using PyTorch's native autograd engine. Results include full Hessian matrices and their diagonals across different layers and configurations.

## 📚 Citation
If you find our work helpful, please cite us:
```bibtex
@misc{ilin2025hessian,
      title={Hessian of Perplexity for Large Language Models by PyTorch autograd (Open Source)},
      author={Ivan Ilin},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2504.04520},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.LG},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.04520},
}
```

## ✅ Model Compatibility

This repository is **compatible** with:

- 🧠 [**OPT models**](https://huggingface.co/models?search=facebook/opt) (e.g. `facebook/opt-125m`)
- 🐑 [**LLaMA 2/3/4 models**](https://huggingface.co/models?search=llama) (e.g. `meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B`)
- 🐣 [**TinyLlama**](https://huggingface.co/TinyLlama) (e.g. `TinyLlama/TinyLlama-1.1B-Chat-v1.0`)

These models are supported via the Hugging Face Transformers interface.

---

## 📊 Results
### 📌 Full Hessian (Heatmaps for different subsets of parameters)
<p>
  <img src="pdf/hessian_q_proj_t_768.png" width="49%" alt="Hessian of q_proj">
  <img src="pdf/hessian_all_layers_first_block_t_300.png" width="49%" alt="Hessian of all layers">
</p>

<p>
  <i>Left: </i>Hessian for $Q_{proj} \in \mathbb{R}^{768 \times 768}$ from block 0 — first 768 params.<br>
  <i>Right: </i>Hessian for all 6 linear layers in block 0 — 300 params each.
</p>

<p>
  <img src="pdf/hessian_q_proj_all_blocks_t_150.png" width="49%" alt="Hessian of q_proj all blocks">
  <img src="pdf/hessian_all_layers_all_blocks_t_25.png" width="49%" alt="Hessian of all layers all blocks">
</p>

<p>
  <i>Left: </i>Hessian for q_proj across 12 blocks — 150 params each.<br>
  <i>Right: </i>Hessian for all layers in 12 blocks — 25 params each × 6 layers/block.
</p>

### 🔽 Download PyTorch Tensors
Saved as PyTorch tensors:
* [hessian_q_proj_t_768.pt](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/blob/main/data/hessian_q_proj_t_768.pt)
* [hessian_q_proj_all_blocks_t_150.pt](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/blob/main/data/hessian_q_proj_all_blocks_t_150.pt)
* [hessian_all_layers_first_block_t_300.pt](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/blob/main/data/hessian_all_layers_first_block_t_300.pt)
* [hessian_all_layers_all_blocks_t_25.pt](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/blob/main/data/hessian_all_layers_all_blocks_t_25.pt)
* [hessian_diag_q_proj_vhp_samples_5000.pt](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/blob/main/data/diag_hessian/hessian_diag_q_proj_vhp_samples_5000.pt)



### 🔶 Influence of Batch Size
<img src="pdf/losses_vs_bs.png" width="100%" alt="Hessian vs batch size">

Experiments with varying batch size $b \in \\{1, ..., 140\\}$.

### ⭐ Diagonals of the Hessian (entire linear layer)
<img src="pdf/losses_vs_k.png" width="100%" alt="VHP samples">

Varying number of VHP samples $k \in \\{1, ..., 3000\\}$ for diagonal estimation.

---

## ⚙️ Setup
- Python version: [3.12.4](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3124/) 🐍
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

📦 [Click here for full Python 3.12.4 installation guide](PYTHON_INSTALL.md)

---

## 🚀 Parameters
| Argument           | Description                                                          |
|--------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `--model`          | Hugging Face model identifier.                                       |
| `--layer_name`     | Name of the linear layer to evaluate.                                |
| `--t`              | Number of parameters to consider per layer.                          |
| `--block_index`    | Index of a single block (used in some scripts).                      |
| `--num_blocks`     | Number of blocks to include.                                         |
| `--num_layers`     | Number of linear layers per block.                                   |
| `--b`              | Total number of samples for perplexity.                              |
| `--vhp_samples`    | VHP samples for Hessian diagonal estimation.                         |
| `--model_input_bs` | Number of samples per batch.                                         |
| `--seqlen`         | The sequence length for the model. By default it is equal to model.seqlen |
| `--cache_dir`      | Where to load/store weights. Default: `llm_weights`.                 |
| `--seed`           | Random seed.                                                         |

> 💡 **Tips:**
> - Use larger `--model_input_bs` on GPUs with more memory to speed up runtime.
> - Higher `--b` and `--vhp_samples` give more accurate results, but increase compute time.

---

## 🔬 Running your experiments

> [!NOTE]  
> Please note that after running any scripts, a `.pt` Hessian tensor and a `.pdf` heatmap of the Hessian will be saved in the `/data` folder.

### 🔹 Single Layer from One Block
```bash
python single_layer_single_block.py \
    --model facebook/opt-125m \
    --layer_name self_attn.q_proj \
    --block_index 0 \
    --t 5 \
    --b 30 \
    --model_input_bs 2 \
    --seed 0 \
    --cache_dir llm_weights
```

### 🔹 Single Layer from Several Blocks
```bash
python single_layer_several_blocks.py \
    --model facebook/opt-125m \
    --layer_name self_attn.q_proj \
    --t 5 \
    --num_blocks 3 \
    --b 30 \
    --model_input_bs 2 \
    --seed 0 \
    --cache_dir llm_weights
```

### 🔹 Several Layers from Several Blocks
```bash
python several_layers_several_blocks.py \
    --model facebook/opt-125m \
    --t 5 \
    --num_layers 3 \
    --num_blocks 3 \
    --b 30 \
    --model_input_bs 2 \
    --seed 0 \
    --cache_dir llm_weights
```

### 🔹 Compute only Diagonal Elements (full layer)
```bash
python hessian_diag_single_layer.py \
    --model facebook/opt-125m \
    --layer_name self_attn.q_proj \
    --vhp_samples 10 \
    --block_index 0 \
    --b 30 \
    --model_input_bs 2 \
    --seed 0 \
    --cache_dir llm_weights
```

---

## 📄 License
MIT License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

## 💬 Join the Discussion
We welcome issues, feature requests, and contributions! Feel free to open an [issue](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/issues) or a [pull request](https://github.com/vectozavr/llm-hessian/pulls).
